.TH EMBY 1 "2026-02-16" "emby 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
emby \- command-line interface for Emby Media Server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emby
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B emby
is a CLI tool for interacting with an Emby Media Server.
It can display playback status, manage library scans, list users and devices,
search the library, and more.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B playing \fR[\fB\-p\fR|\fB\-j\fR|\fB\-r\fR] [\fIuser\fR ...]
Show what's currently playing.
With
.BR \-p ", " \-\-plain
disable colorized output.
With
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
output results as JSON.
With
.BR \-r ", " \-\-raw
output the raw JSON payload from the Emby API.
Optionally filter by one or more user names.
.TP
.B scan \fR[\fIlibrary\fR ...]
Trigger library scans.
Accepts library types:
.BR shows ", " movies ", " music ", or " all
(default:
.BR all ).
.RS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-recursive
Recursively scan directories (default).
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-no\-recursive
Disable recursive scanning.
.TP
.B \-\-metadata\-refresh\-mode \fImode\fR
Metadata refresh mode (default: Default).
.TP
.B \-\-image\-refresh\-mode \fImode\fR
Image refresh mode (default: Default).
.TP
.B \-\-replace\-all\-metadata
Replace all metadata.
.TP
.B \-\-replace\-all\-images
Replace all images.
.RE
.TP
.B restart
Restart the Emby server.
.TP
.B system
Show system information.
.TP
.B users
List users.
.TP
.B devices
List devices.
.TP
.B libraries
List libraries.
.TP
.B find\-server \fR[\fB\-t\fR \fIseconds\fR]
Find Emby servers on the local network via UDP discovery.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-timeout " " \fIseconds\fR
Discovery timeout in seconds (default: 3).
.RE
.TP
.B activity \fR[\fB\-l\fR \fIcount\fR]
Show recent activity log.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-limit " " \fIcount\fR
Maximum number of entries to show (default: 25).
.RE
.TP
.B latest \fR[\fB\-l\fR \fIcount\fR] [\fB\-t\fR \fItype\fR] [\fB\-u\fR \fIuser\fR]
Show recently added media.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-limit " " \fIcount\fR
Maximum number of items to show (default: 20).
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-type " " \fItype\fR
Filter by type:
.BR movies ", " shows ", or " music .
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user " " \fIname\fR
User name (defaults to first admin user).
.RE
.TP
.B search \fR[\fB\-l\fR \fIcount\fR] \fIquery\fR
Search the library.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-limit " " \fIcount\fR
Maximum number of results (default: 25).
.RE
.TP
.B next\-up \fR[\fB\-l\fR \fIcount\fR] [\fB\-u\fR \fIuser\fR]
Show next episodes to watch.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-limit " " \fIcount\fR
Maximum number of items to show (default: 20).
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user " " \fIname\fR
User name (defaults to first admin user).
.RE
.TP
.B upcoming \fR[\fB\-l\fR \fIcount\fR] [\fB\-u\fR \fIuser\fR]
Show upcoming TV episodes.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-limit " " \fIcount\fR
Maximum number of items to show (default: 20).
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user " " \fIname\fR
User name (defaults to first admin user).
.RE
.TP
.B tasks \fR[\fB\-a\fR]
List scheduled tasks.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Show hidden tasks.
.RE
.TP
.B tasks run \fIid\fR
Run a scheduled task by ID.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B emby
reads configuration from a JSON file or environment variables.
.SS Environment Variables
.TP
.B EMBY_API_URL
The base URL of the Emby server (e.g., http://emby.local:8096).
.TP
.B EMBY_API_KEY
The API key for authenticating with the Emby server.
.PP
If both environment variables are set and non-empty, they take precedence
over the configuration file.
.SS Configuration File
If environment variables are not set, configuration is read from a JSON file at:
.PP
.RS
.B $EMBY_CONFIG
if set, otherwise
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/emby\-api.json
(default:
.BR ~/.config/emby\-api.json ).
.RE
.PP
The file must contain:
.PP
.RS
.nf
{
  "api_url": "http://emby.local:8096",
  "api_key": "your-api-key-here"
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
It is recommended to restrict permissions on this file:
.PP
.RS
.B chmod 600 ~/.config/emby\-api.json
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (configuration error, network failure, API error, etc.).
.SH AUTHORS
Joshua Priddle <jpriddle@me.com>
.SH LICENSE
MIT
